---
title: "不放逸品"
subtitle: "2:21-32"
language: "pi"
date: 2016-08-28
weight: 102
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Appamādavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 不放逸品
- *Carefulness*

---

#### 21

Appamādo amatapadaṃ, pamādo maccuno padaṃ,  
appamattā na mīyanti, ye pamattā yathā matā.

- 無逸不死道，放逸趣死路，無逸者不死，放逸者如屍。
- *Carefulness is the place of the death-free, carelessness is the place of death. The careful do not die, the careless are as though (already) dead.*

> - I take *pada* to mean “place”, see the note on 1.
> - Dhp-a: *maccuno ti maraṇassa. padaṃ ti upāyo maggo.*

#### 22

Evaṃ visesato ñatvā, appamādamhi paṇḍitā,  
appamāde pamodanti, ariyānaṃ gocare ratā.

- 智者深知此，所行不放逸，不放逸得樂，喜悅於聖境。
- *Learned men, knowing this especially in respect of carefulness, rejoice in carefulness, delighting in the realm of the noble ones.*

#### 23

Te jhāyino sātatikā, niccaṃ daḷhaparakkamā,  
phusanti dhīrā nibbānaṃ, yogakkhemaṃ anuttaraṃ.

- 智者常堅忍，勇猛修禪定，解脫得安隱，證無上涅槃。
- *Meditating, persevering, constantly making a firm effort, those wise ones attain nibbāna, supreme rest from exertion.*

> - Dhp-a: *dhīrā paṇḍitā*. The word *dhīrā* has two meanings “firm” and “wise”. I normally translate in accordance with the cty's explanation. For *dhīra* as “firm” see 208 261.

---

#### 24

Uṭṭhānavato satīmato, sucikammassa nisammakārino,  
saññatassa dhammajīvino, appamattassa yasobhivaḍḍhati.

- 奮勉常正念，淨行能克己，如法而生活，無逸善名增。
- *Of one who exerts himself, is mindful, does pure deeds, acts considerately, is restrained, lives according to the law, is careful, the fame increases.*

> - For the use of the absolutive *nisamma* in a syntactic cpd, cf. *niggayha-vādin* 76, *vivicca-sayana* 271. For other syntactic cpd, see *yattha-kāma-nipātin* 35-6.

---

#### 25

Uṭṭhānenappamādena, saṃyamena damena ca,  
dīpaṃ kayirātha medhāvī, yaṃ ogho nābhikīrati.

- 奮勉不放逸，克己自調禦，智者自作洲，不為洪水沒。
- *By exertion, by carefulness, by restraint and self-control, a wise man would make an island, which a flood does not overwhelm.*

> - GDhp 111 reads *ya jara nabhimardati*, Udāna-v *tam ogho nābhimardati*.
> - Since the flood is *saṃsāra*, here *dīpa* must mean “island”, cf. 236 238. Attempting to explain why the Chinese version of this verse has “darkness” instead of “flood”, Brough said “an alternative would be *taṃm ogho*, read as *taṃ mogho*, and interpreted as *moho*, or even appearing in this form through a Prakrit version”, i.e. a Prakrit which turned *-gh- &gt; -h-*. He continued, “From this, ‘darkness’ would be an easy step”. In these circumstances the translation of *dīpa* as “lamp” would be understandable.

---

#### 26

Pamādam-anuyuñjanti, bālā dummedhino janā,  
appamādañca medhāvī, dhanaṃ seṭṭhaṃ va rakkhati.

- 暗鈍愚癡人，耽溺於放逸，智者不放逸，如富人護寶。
- *Fools, stupid people, apply themselves to carelessness, but a wise man guards his carefulness as his best treasure.*

> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

#### 27

Mā pamādam-anuyuñjetha, mā kāmaratisanthavaṃ,  
appamatto hi jhāyanto, pappoti vipulaṃ sukhaṃ.

- 莫耽溺放逸，莫嗜愛欲樂，警覺修定者，始得大安樂。
- *You should not apply yourselves to carelessness, nor to acquaintance with delight in sensual pleasures. For being careful (and) meditating one obtains great happiness.*

> - It would also be possible to explain *kāmaratisanthava* as a dvandva cpd “sensual pleasures, delight and acquaintance”.

---

#### 28

Pamādaṃ appamādena, yadā nudati paṇḍito,  
paññāpāsādam-āruyha, asoko sokiniṃ pajaṃ,  
pabbataṭṭho va bhūmaṭṭhe, dhīro bāle avekkhati.

- 智者以無逸，除逸則無憂，聖賢登慧閣，觀愚者多憂，如登於高山，俯視地上物。
- *When the learned man thrusts away carelessness by carefulness, climbing on to the palace of knowledge, he gazes griefless on the grieving people. The wise man gazes down on fools as one standing on a mountain gazes down on those standing on the ground (below).*

> - I translate *paññā* and its derivatives as “knowledge” or “wisdom”, depending on the context.

---

#### 29

Appamatto pamattesu, suttesu bahujāgaro,  
abalassaṃ va sīghasso, hitvā yāti sumedhaso.

- 放逸中無逸，如眾睡獨醒，智者如駿馳，駑駘所不及。
- *Careful among the careless, wide awake among those asleep, the wise man goes leaving (them) behind, as a swift horse leaves behind a weak horse.*

---

#### 30

Appamādena maghavā, devānaṃ seṭṭhataṃ gato,  
appamādaṃ pasaṃsanti, pamādo garahito sadā.

- 摩伽以無逸，得為諸天主，無逸人所贊，放逸為人訶。
- *By carefulness Maghavā (Indra) went to supremacy among the gods. They praise carefulness. Carelessness is always blamed.*

---

#### 31

Appamādarato bhikkhu, pamāde bhayadassivā,  
saṃyojanaṃ aṇuṃthūlaṃ, ḍahaṃ aggīva gacchati.

- 樂不放逸比丘，或者懼見放逸，猶如猛火炎炎，燒去大結小結。
- *A bhikkhu who delights in carefulness, who sees danger in carelessness, goes about like a fire consuming his fetter, small or large.*

> - Here *bhayadassivā* means “seeing something to be afraid of” i.e. “seeing danger”, cf. *bhayadassino* 317.
> - For *aṇuṃthūlaṃ*, see the note on 19.

#### 32

Appamādarato bhikkhu, pamāde bhayadassivā,  
abhabbo parihānāya, nibbānasseva santike.

- 樂不放逸比丘，或者懼見放逸，彼已鄰近涅槃，必定不易墮落。
- *A bhikkhu who delights in carefulness, who sees danger in carelessness, cannot fall away but is indeed near to nibbāna.*

> - The dental *n* in *nibbāna* is an eastern form. For other eastern forms, see *āvudha* 40, *-āni* 82 188, *pallala* 91 155, *antalikkha* 127-8, *visodhaye* 281, *ve* 275 315, *suddhajīve   atandite* 375, *paḷigha* 398, *pure* 421.