---
title: "心品"
subtitle: "3:33-43"
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 103
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Cittavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 心品
- *Thought*

---

##### 33

Phandanaṃ capalaṃ cittaṃ, dūrakkhaṃ dunnivārayaṃ,  
ujuṃ karoti medhāvī, usukāro va tejanaṃ.

- 輕動變易心，難護難制服，智者調直之，如匠搦箭直。
- *The wise man makes straight his trembling, unsteady thought which is difficult to guard and difficult to restrain, just as a fletcher makes an arrow straight.*

> - Note *uju* here, but *ujju-* in 108.
> - As Rau points out, *ujuṃ karoti* is the equivalent of *namayanti* 80 145.

##### 34

Vārijo va thale khitto, okamokata ubbhato,  
pariphandatidaṃ cittaṃ, māradheyyaṃ pahātave.

- 如魚離水棲，投於陸地上，以此戰慄心，擺脫魔境界。
- *Like a fish taken from its watery home and thrown on the ground, this thought quivers all over in order to escape the dominion of Māra.*

> - The cty suggests that the first *oka* means “water”. For *oka* = “home”, cf, 87 91. For the sandhi *-m-* in *oka-m-okata*, cf. 103 247 390.
> - Dhp-a: *ubbhato ti uddhato*. PED says that *ubbhata* is derived &lt; Skt *uddhṛta*, but I see no reason to doubt a derivation &lt; Skt *udbhṛta*.
> - It would appear that the cty, or the tradition which it was following, did not recognise *pahātave* as an infinitive of purpose, but assumed that *-tave* was for *-tavve*, i.e. an eastern neuter sg of the future passive participle. For eastern forms see the note on 32. For the infinitive ending, cf. *netave* 180.

---

##### 35

Dunniggahassa lahuno, yatthakāmanipātino,  
cittassa damatho sādhu, cittaṃ dantaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.

- 此心隨欲轉，輕躁難捉摸，善哉心調伏，心調得安樂。
- *Good is the taming of thought which is hard to grasp, light, alighting where it will. Tamed thought is the bringer of happiness.*

> - For the syntactic cpd *yatthakāmanipātin*, see the note on 24.

##### 36

Sududdasaṃ sunipuṇaṃ, yatthakāmanipātinaṃ,  
cittaṃ rakkhetha medhāvī, cittaṃ guttaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.

- 此心隨欲轉，微妙極難見，智者防護心，心護得安樂。
- *A wise man should guard his thought, which is difficult to see, extremely subtle, alighting where it will. Guarded thought is the bringer of happiness.*

---

##### 37

Dūraṅgamaṃ ekacaraṃ, asarīraṃ guhāsayaṃ,  
ye cittaṃ saṃyam-essanti, mokkhanti mārabandhanā.

- 遠行與獨行，無形隱深窟，誰能調伏心，解脫魔羅縛。
- *Those who will restrain their thought, which travels far, alone, incorporeal, lying in the cave (of the heart), will be freed from Māra's fetter.*

> - The cty is explaining *mokkhanti* as a future passive, cf. *pamokkhanti* 276.

---

##### 38

Anavaṭṭhitacittassa, saddhammaṃ avijānato,  
pariplavapasādassa, paññā na paripūrati.

- 心若不安定，又不了正法，信心不堅者，智慧不成就。
- *The wisdom of one whose thought is unsteady, who does not know the true doctrine, whose serenity of mind is troubled, is not perfected.*

##### 39

Anavassutacittassa, ananvāhatacetaso,  
puññapāpapahīnassa, natthi jāgarato bhayaṃ.

- 若得無漏心，亦無諸惑亂，超越善與惡，覺者無恐怖。
- *There is no fear for one whose thought is untroubled (by faults), whose thought is unagitated, who is freed from good and evil, who is awake.*

> - For *an-avassuta*, cf. *an-ussuta* 400.

---

##### 40

Kumbhūpamaṃ kāyam-imaṃ viditvā, nagarūpamaṃ cittam-idaṃ ṭhapetvā,  
yodhetha māraṃ paññāvudhena, jitañca rakkhe anivesano siyā.

- 知身如陶器，住心似城廓，慧劍擊魔羅，守勝莫染著。
- *Knowing that this body is (fragile) like a jar, making this thought (firm) like a city, one should fight Māra with the weapon of wisdom, and one should guard what has been conquered, one should take no rest.*

> - Dhp-a: *anivesano siyā ti anālayo bhaveyya*.
> - The alternation *v/y* in *āvudha*, which is the equivalent of Skt *āyudha*, is an eastern feature. For alternation, see the note on *māluvā* 162 and *parissaya* 328.

---

##### 41

Aciraṃ vatayaṃ kāyo, pathaviṃ adhisessati,  
chuddho apetaviññāṇo, niratthaṃ va kaliṅgaraṃ.

- 此身實不久，當睡於地下，被棄無意識，無用如木屑。
- *Before long, alas, this body will lie on the earth, rejected, without consciousness, like a useless log of wood.*

---

##### 42

Diso disaṃ yaṃ taṃ kayirā, verī vā pana verinaṃ,  
micchāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ, pāpiyo naṃ tato kare.

- 仇敵害仇敵，怨家對怨家，若心向邪行，惡業最為大。
- *Whatever an enemy may do to an enemy or, again, whatever a hater may do to a hater, a wrongly directed mind would do worse than that to him.*

> - It is not easy to translate *yan taṃ kayirā*. We could assume that the antecedent had been included in the relative clause “That which an enemy might do ...”.
> - Udāna-v changes the construction *na dveṣī dveṣiṇaḥ kuryād vairī   vā vairiṇo hitam*.
> - For *vā pana*, cf. *vā puna* 271.

##### 43

Na taṃ mātā pitā kayirā, aññe vā pi ca ñātakā,  
sammāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ, seyyaso naṃ tato kare.

- 善非父母作，亦非他眷屬，若心向正行，善業最為大。
- *A mother or father or any other relative would not do that (good), a rightly directed mind would do better than that to him.*

> - Udāna-v has *na taṃ mātā pitā vāpi kuryāj ... cittaṃ yat kuryād   dhitam ātmanaḥ*, again introducing *hitam*, “Parents, etc., would not do that benefit which a rightly disposed mind would do”.
> - We should expect 43 to be parallel to 42 “Whatever an enemy might do to him, a wrongly disposed mind would do worse than that. Whatever his parents, etc., might do to him, a rightly disposed mind would do better than that”. To get such a parallelism, we should need to read *yaṃ taṃ* in pāda a, in place of *na taṃ*. If there has been a change in the reading, the reading *na taṃ* in Udāna-v clearly shows that the change is old.
> - For *seyyaso*, with the suffix *-so* added to the comparative *seyya* (&lt; Skt *śreyas*), see Geiger §100.3.