---
title: "千品"
subtitle: "8:100-115"
lang: "pi"
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 108
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Sahassavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 千品
- *Thousands*

---

##### 100

Sahassam-api ce vācā, anatthapadasaṃhitā,  
ekaṃ atthapadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati.

- 雖誦一千言，若無義理者，不如一義語，聞已得寂靜。
- *If there were a thousand utterances made up of meaningless words, better is one word of meaning, which hearing one becomes calm.*

> - I take *-pada-* to mean “word” in pāda b, see the note on 1.
> - I take *api* in the sense of giving totality to a numeral or quasi-numeral, rather than in the concessive sense “even”, cf. *sabbam pi* 108, *ettam pi* 196, *ubho   pi* 306.

##### 101

Sahassam-api ce gāthā, anatthapadasaṃhitā,  
ekaṃ gāthāpadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati.

- 雖誦千句偈，若無義理者，不如一句偈，聞已得寂靜。
- *If there were a thousand verses made up of meaningless word, better is one word of a verse, which hearing one becomes calm.*

> - The cty seems to be taking *gāthāpada* to mean “verse”. I take *-pada* to mean “word”, see the note on 1.

---

##### 102

Yo ca gāthā sataṃ bhāse, anatthapadasaṃhitā,  
ekaṃ dhammapadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati.

- 彼誦百句偈，若無義理者，不如一法句，聞已得寂靜。
- *And if anyone were to speak one hundred verses made up of meaningless words, better is one word of the doctrine, which hearing one becomes calm.*

> - For *yo = si quis*, see the note on 76.
> - I take *-pada* to mean “word” in *dhammapada*, see the note on 1. I assume that the syntax is lax, and *anatthapadasaṃhitā* agrees with *gāthā* in *gāthāsataṃ*.

##### 103

Yo sahassaṃ sahassena, saṅgāme mānuse jine,  
ekañca jeyyamattānaṃ, sa ve saṅgāmajuttamo.

- 彼於戰場上，雖勝百萬人，未若克己者，戰士之最上。
- *If a man were to conquer in battle a thousand times a thousand men, but conquer one, himself, he indeed is the best conqueror in battle.*

> - For the sandhi consonant *-m-* in *jeyya-m-attānaṃ*, see the note on 34.
> - Note the sandhi of *-i + u- &gt; -u-* in *saṅgāmaji* (Skt *-jit*) *+ uttamo &gt;   saṅgāmajuttamo*. It would be possible to take this as a cpd, or as two separate words “he is the best conqueror” or “he is the best of conquerors”.
> - For *ca = tu*, suggested by *pana* in the cty, see the note on 5.

---

##### 104

Attā have jitaṃ seyyo, yā cāyaṃ itarā pajā,  
attadantassa posassa, niccaṃ saññatacārino.

- 能克制自己，過於勝他人，若有克己者，常行自節制。
- *The self as a conquest is indeed better than these other people (as a conquest) for a man who has tamed himself, who constantly wanders self-controlled.*

> - Pādas ab go with 103, and pādas cd with 105.
> - Clearly the cty was puzzled by the fact that *jitaṃ* seems to be in agreement with *attā*, but is neuter. Rather than following the cty in assuming a change of gender, I take *jitaṃ* as the past participle used as a noun “conquering” or “conquest”, in apposition to *attā*, i.e. “the self as a conquest” is better than other people as a conquest, i.e. the conquest of the self is better than the conquest of other people. For a possible example of a change of gender, see the note on 201. For a past participle used as a noun, cf. *jita* 105 179, *apajita* 105, *huta* 106-7, *pajjalita* 146, *mamāyita* 367.
> - For *posa*, see 125. For the relation between *poso* and Skt *puruṣa*, see Sn 110.
> - In *yā cāyaṃ* we presumably have *yā ce   ayaṃ*, cf. *yañce* in 106 foll.
> - For the implication of inferiority in *itarā pajā*, see the note on 85.

##### 105

Neva devo na gandhabbo, na māro saha brahmunā,  
jitaṃ apajitaṃ kayirā, tathārūpassa jantuno.

- 天神乾闥婆，魔王並梵天，皆遭於敗北，不能勝彼人。
- *Not a god nor a gandhabba, nor Māra with Brahmā, could make conquest into defeat for a person of such a kind.*

> - For *jitaṃ* and *apajitaṃ* as past participles used as nouns, see the note on 104.
> - For the labialisation of *-a- &gt; -u-* in *brahmunā*, cf. 230 and *sotthim* 219, and see Norman 1976B.

---

##### 106

Māse māse sahassena, yo yajetha sataṃ samaṃ,  
ekañca bhāvitattānaṃ, muhuttam-api pūjaye,  
sā yeva pūjanā seyyo, yañce vassasataṃ hutaṃ.

- 月月投千金，供犧牲百年，不如須臾間，供養修己者，彼如是供養，勝祭祀百年。
- *If anyone were to sacrifice with a thousand month by month for a hundred years, but were to honour even for a moment someone with developed self — that very homage would better than sacrificing for a hundred years.*

> - For *hutaṃ* as a past particle used as a noun “sacrificing”, see the note on 104.
> - For *yo = si quis*, see the note on 76.
> - For *yañce* = “than if”, cf. 229 308 and *yā cāyaṃ* 104.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.
> - It is not easy to analyse *sataṃsamaṃ*, since *-samaṃ* “year” appears to be sg, Udāna-v has the cpd *samāśatam*, Mvu has *śataṃ śataṃ*. The Udāna-v reading suggests that the original form in Pāli was *samāsataṃ*, which developed to *samaṃsataṃ* by the common alternation of a long vowel and a short nasalised vowel before a consonant (VC/VNC). This cpd was probably assumed to consist of two separate words *samaṃ sataṃ*, both apparently acc sg forms, which could therefore be recited/written in the reverse order, since the scansion was the same either way.

##### 107

Yo ca vassasataṃ jantu, aggiṃ paricare vane,  
ekañca bhāvitattānaṃ, muhuttam-api pūjaye,  
sā yeva pūjanā seyyo, yañce vassasataṃ hutaṃ.

- 若人一百年，事火於林中，不如須臾間，供養修己者，彼如是供養，勝祭祀百年。
- *And if any person were to attend the fire for a hundred years in the forest, but were to honour even for a moment someone with developed self — that very homage would be better than sacrificing for a hundred years.*

---

##### 108

Yaṃ kiñci yiṭṭhaṃ va hutaṃ va loke, saṃvaccharaṃ yajetha puññapekkho,  
sabbam pi taṃ na catubhāgam-eti, abhivādanā ujjugatesu seyyo.

- 若人於世間，施捨或供養，求福一周年，如是諸功德，不及四分一，禮敬正直者。
- *If a man were to sacrifice in this world any sacrifice or offering for a year, looking for merit, all that does not come to a quarter (of the better offering). Respectful salutation to the righteous is a better thing.*

> - For the cognate acc *yiṭṭhaṃ* with *yajetha*, cf. *acāri cārikaṃ* 326.
> - The cty seems to draw a distinction between *yiṭṭha* and *huta*.
> - For *yaṃ = si quem*, see the note on 76.
> - Note the v.l. *va ... va* for *ca ...   ca*, if we read *va ... va*, we must suppose it is m.c. for *vā ...   vā*.
> - I take *pi* after *sabbam* as implying totality, see the note on *api* in 100.
> - We might regard *-jj-* in *ujju-gatesu* as m.c., but it occurs elsewhere in contexts where lengthening m.c. is not required. It is possible that this is a rare development of *ṛ &gt; ur*, i.e. *ṛju &gt; *urju &gt; ujju*, see Geiger §12 note 1, contrast *uju* in 33.

---

##### 109

Abhivādanasīlissa, niccaṃ vuḍḍhāpacāyino,  
cattāro dhammā vaḍḍhanti, āyu vaṇṇo sukhaṃ balaṃ.

- 好樂敬禮者，常尊於長老，四法得增長，壽美樂與力。
- *To him who practises respectful salutation, constantly respecting his elders, four things increase, age, beauty, happiness, strengh.*

> - For *-sīli(n)* at the end of cpds in the sense of “practising”, see MW, s.v. *śīla*.
> - As Fausbøll pointed out, the same verse, with slight variations, occurs in Manu. Winternitz suggested that this probable quotation from a brahmanical text was given simply to connect the following verses (110-5) with it. It is noteworthy that it is not found in this introductory position in PDhp, GDhp or Udāna-v, and the verse is in fact found only in GDhp 172, in the Suha-varga.

---

##### 110

Yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, dussīlo asamāhito,  
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, sīlavantassa jhāyino.

- 若人壽百歲，破戒無三昧，不如生一日，持戒修禪定。
- *And if anyone were to live for a hundred years, wicked and unconcentrated, living for one day would be better for him being virtuous and meditating.*

> - For *yo = si quis*, see the note on 76.

##### 111

Yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, duppañño asamāhito,  
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, paññavantassa jhāyino.

- 若人壽百歲，無慧無三昧，不如生一日，具慧修禪定。
- *And if anyone were to live for one hundred years, ignorant and unconcentrated, living for one day would be better for him having knowledge and meditating.*

##### 112

Yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, kusīto hīnavīriyo,  
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, vīriyam-ārabhato daḷhaṃ.

- 若人壽百歲，怠惰不精進，不如生一日，勵力行精進。
- *And if anyone were to live for one hundred years, lazy and lacking in energy, living for day would be better for him strenuously putting forth energy.*

> - I take *daḷhaṃ* as an acc used adverbially, cf. 61.

##### 113

Yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, apassaṃ udayabbayaṃ,  
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, passato udayabbayaṃ.

- 若人壽百歲，不見生滅法，不如生一日，得見生滅法。
- *And if anyone were to live one hundred years, not seeing arising and passing away, living for one day would be better for him seeing arising and passing away.*

##### 114

Yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, apassaṃ amataṃ padaṃ,  
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, passato amataṃ padaṃ.

- 若人壽百歲，不見不死道，不如生一日，得見不死道。
- *And if anyone were to live for one hundred years, not seeing the place which is death-free, living for one day would be better for him seeing the place which is death-free.*

> - In pādas bd *amataṃ padaṃ* is probably a split cpd, with *-ṃ-* m.c., cf. *amata-pada* in 21. I take *padaṃ* to mean “place”, see the note on 1.

##### 115

Yo ca vassasataṃ jīve, apassaṃ dhammam-uttamaṃ,  
ekāhaṃ jīvitaṃ seyyo, passato dhammam-uttamaṃ.

- 若人壽百歲，不見最上法，不如生一日，得見最上法。
- *And if anyone were to live one hundred years, not seeing the highest doctrine, living for one day would be better for him seeing the highest doctrine.*