---
title: "樂品"
subtitle: "15:197-208"
lang: "pi"
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 115
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Sukhavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 樂品
- *Happiness*

---

#### 197

Susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, verinesu averino,  
verinesu manussesu, viharāma averino.

- 我等實樂生，憎怨中無憎，於憎怨人中，我等無憎住。
- *We live very happily indeed without hate among those who hate, among men who hate we dwell without hate.*

> - It would be possible to take *jīvāma/viharāma* as imperatives “let us live/dwell”.
> - Note that *verinesu* in pādas bc shows the development of a consonant *n-*stem to an *a-*stem, doubtless on the analogy of *verinaṃ* 42. For the comparable change of an *s-*stem, see the note on 29.

#### 198

Susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, āturesu anāturā,  
āturesu manussesu, viharāma anāturā.

- 我等實樂生，疾病中無病，於疾病人中，我等無病住。
- *We live very happily indeed without disease among those who are diseased, among men who are diseased we dwell without disease.*

#### 199

Susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, ussukesu anussukā,  
ussukesu manassesu, viharāma anussukā.

- 我等實樂生，貪欲中無欲，於貪欲人中，我等無欲住。
- *We live very happily indeed without care among those who are full of care, among men who are full of care we dwell without care.*

#### 200

Susukhaṃ vata jīvāma, yesaṃ no natthi kiñcanaṃ,  
pītibhakkhā bhavissāma, devā ābhassarā yathā.

- 我等實樂生，我等無物障，我等樂為食，如光音天人。
- *We live very happily indeed, for whom there is nothing. Feeding on joy we shall be like Ābhassara gods.*

> - For the inclusion of the antecedent *no* in the relative clause (“for whom, (namely) for us”), see the note on 42.

---

#### 201

Jayaṃ veraṃ pasavati, dukkhaṃ seti parājito,  
upasanto sukhaṃ seti, hitvā jayaparājayaṃ.

- 勝利生憎怨，敗者住苦惱，勝敗兩俱捨，和靜住安樂。
- *Being victorious one produces enmity. The conquered one sleeps unhappily. The one at peace, giving up victory and defeat, sleeps happily.*

> - Both Dhp-a and Spk are taking *jayaṃ* as a present participle, and I follow this interpretation because I think that each verb in the verse should have a person as subject: the winner, the loser and the one at peace. There are, however, difficulties in this interpretation. PDhp reads *jayam veraṃ prasavati*, GDhp *jayo vera prasahadi*, Udāna-v *jayād vairaṃ prasavate*. It is possible that *jayaṃ* is the result of a change of the gender of the noun *jaya* to neuter, and it can therefore be the subject of the verb. It is clear that that was the view of the redactor of the Avadāna-śataka, who changed the verse to *jayo vairaṃ prasavati*. The same change of gender seems to occur at SN. Here, however, the possibility of contamination by *jayaṃ* in pāda a cannot be ruled out. For the suggestion of a change of gender see the note on 104. Udāna-v *jayād* suggests the possibility of taking *jayaṃ* as an abl in *-aṃ*, see the note on 49.
> - For the suggestion that *pasavati*, *pasahati* and *prasavate* are related and show a glide consonant alternation *-v-/-h- &lt; -y-* in **pasayati = seti*, see Norman 1971B.

---

#### 202

Natthi rāgasamo aggi, natthi dosasamo kali,  
natthi khandhasamā dukkhā, natthi santiparaṃ sukhaṃ.

- 無火如貪欲，無惡如瞋恨，無苦如五蘊，無樂勝寂靜。
- *There is no fire like passion, there is no ill like hatred, there is no suffering like the constituents of personality, there is no happiness greater than peace.*

> - Following Collins, I adopt “constituent of personality” as the translation for *khandha*.
> - For *kali* in the sense of “evil” see Sn 659, for it in the sense of “losing throw at dice” see 252.
> - The reading *samānā* in the cty, if correct, as opposed to *samo* in the explanation of *dosasamo*, supports the reading *khandhādisā* instead of *khandhasamā*. It is not clear how *khandhādisa* should be analysed. Andersen divides it as *khandhā-disa*, and derives the second element of the cpd from *dṛśa*. He does not explain the final *-ā* of *khandhā*. All the forms he quotes, except *sadisa*, have a long vowel, e.g. *etādisa tādisa*, etc., but they are all based upon demonstrative or personal pronouns, and I know of no other example of *-(ā)-disa* being added to a noun. It is possible that the original form of the pāda had *khandha-sadisā*, which would have given a nine-syllable pāda, normalised by assuming resolution of the fouth syllable. If such a form were “corrected” by omitting a syllable and lengthening to *-ādisā*, on the analogy of *tādisa*, etc., then the present form of the pāda would have resulted.
> - Andersen analyses *para* in *santiparaṃ* as meaning “higher, superior” and translates the cpd as “higher than rest”. This is followed by PED (s.v. *para*), and it must be the explanation, but (despite PED) I know of no other example of *para* occurring at the end of a cpd of this nature.

---

#### 203

Jighacchāparamā rogā, saṅkhāraparamā dukhā,  
etaṃ ñatvā yathābhūtaṃ, nibbānaṃ paramaṃ sukhaṃ.

- 饑為最大病，行為最大苦，如實知此已，涅槃樂最上。
- *Greed is the worst of diseases, conditioned things are the worst sorrow, (for one) knowing this as it really is, nibbāna is the best happiness.*

> - I adopt “conditioned things” as the translation for *saṅkhāra*.
> - In pāda b *dukhā* is m.c.

#### 204

Ārogyaparamā lābhā, santuṭṭhiparamaṃ dhanaṃ,  
vissāsaparamā ñāti, nibbānaṃ paramaṃ sukhaṃ.

- 無病最上利，知足最上財，信賴最上親，涅槃最上樂。
- *Health is the best possession, contentment is the best wealth, confidence is the best relative, nibbāna is the best happiness.*

---

#### 205

Pavivekarasaṃ pitvā, rasaṃ upasamassa ca,  
niddaro hoti nippāpo, dhammapītirasaṃ pivaṃ.

- 已飲獨居味，以及寂靜味，喜飲於法味，離怖畏去惡。
- *Having drunk the flavour of seclusion, and the flavour of peace, one becomes free from distress and free from evil, drinking the flavour of joy in the doctrine.*

> - I translate *dara* as “fear” or “distress”. Its derivation is not clear. It may be connected with *daratha* but, if so, the reason for *-dd-* here is not clear. It is not required m.c., although it is in *vīta-ddaro* at 385, Udāna-v has *nirjvaro* here, but *(vīta-)rāga* at 385. There are no other parallel versions to this verse, but at 385 PDhp has *vīta-jjaro* and GDhp *vikada-dvara*. The latter suggests the possibility of alternative root forms *dvar/dval* parallel to *jvar/jval*.
> - For *dhammapīti* see 79, where there is probably a word-play intended on the two meanings of *pīti*.

---

#### 206

Sāhu dassanam-ariyānaṃ, sannivāso sadā sukho,  
adassanena bālānaṃ, niccam-eva sukhī siyā.

- 善哉見聖者，與彼同住樂，由不見愚人，彼即常歡樂。
- *Sight of the noble ones is good, living with (them) is always happiness, because of not seeing fools one would constantly be happy.*

> - In pāda b we must understand *ariyānaṃ* with *saṃnivāso*. PDhp has *satāṃ* instead of *sadā* “living with good men”.

#### 207

Bālasaṅgatacārī hi, dīgham-addhāna socati,  
dukkho bālehi saṃvāso, amitteneva sabbadā,  
dhīro ca sukhasaṃvāso, ñātīnaṃ va samāgamo.

- 與愚者同行，長時處憂悲，與愚同住苦，如與敵同居，與智者同住，樂如會親族。
- *For he who consorts with fools suffer for a long time, associating with fools is grievous, like associating always with an enemy. But a wise man is good to associate with, like meeting with relatives.*

> - For the sandhi of *-ena + iva* in *amitteneva*, see the note on 66.
> - It is possible that *dhīro* stands for *dhīre* in the sense of Skt *dhīraiḥ*, cf. *bāle* 61. Udāna-v reads *dhīrais tu sukhasaṃvāso* “there is happy dwelling with wise men”, PDhp *dhīrā   sukhasaṃvāsā* “wise men have a happy dwelling”. Rau suggests that we read *sukho ca dhīrasaṃvāso* “dwelling with wise men is happy”.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

#### 208

Tasmā hi —  
Dhīrañca paññañca bahussutañca, dhorayhasīlaṃ vatavantam-ariyaṃ,  
taṃ tādisaṃ sappurisaṃ sumedhaṃ, bhajetha nakkhattapathaṃ va candimā.

- 是故真實——賢者智者多聞者，持戒虔誠與聖者，從斯善人賢慧游，猶如月從於星道。
- *Firm, and wise, and learned, much enduring, dutiful, noble, him, such a one, a good man, wise, one should follow as the moon follows the path of the constellations.*

> - Here the gloss suggests “firm, steady” for *dhīra*, cf. 261.