---
title: "喜愛品"
subtitle: "16:209-220"
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 116
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Piyavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 喜愛品
- *Pleasant*

---

#### 209

Ayoge yuñjam-attānaṃ, yogasmiñca ayojayaṃ,  
atthaṃ hitvā piyaggāhī, pihetattānuyoginaṃ.

- 專事不當事，不事於應修，棄善趨愛欲，卻羨自勉者。
- *Joining oneself to distraction, not joining oneself to concentration, abandoning one's goal and seizing what is pleasant, one envies the one who applies himself to the goal.*

> - Dhp-a confirms that *yuñjam* and *ayojayaṃ* are nom sg present participles, one of the simplex verb and the other of the causative, with no obvious difference in meaning between them.
> - With *attānuyoginaṃ* cf. Udāna-v *arthayogine*, PDhp *atthānuyogināṃ*, GDhp *arthaṇupaśiṇo*, note the alternation *tt/tth/rth*. It would seem that a contrast is implied between one who has abandoned the goal and one who applies himself to it, and it is therefore probable that the correct reading is *atthānuyoginaṃ* “applying himself to the goal, or his own interests”, and the text has been affected by *attānam* in pāda a “one having application of himself”, i.e. “applying himself”. Alternatively we might see *atta &lt;   āpta* “what has been obtained” or &lt; *ātta* “what has been taken up”.
> - For *pihet'* (cty *piheti*), see the note on 94.

#### 210

Mā piyehi samāgañchi, appiyehi kudācanaṃ,  
piyānaṃ adassanaṃ dukkhaṃ, appiyānañca dassanaṃ.

- 莫結交愛人，莫結不愛人，不見愛人苦，見憎人亦苦。
- *Do not at any time associate withe pleasant (or) unpleasant things. Not seeing pleasant things is painful, and also seeing unpleasant things.*

> - For the explanation of the negtive injunctive *mā samāgañchi* by the optative *na samāgaccheyya*, see the note on 133.

#### 211

Tasmā piyaṃ na kayirātha, piyāpāyo hi pāpako,  
ganthā tesaṃ na vijjanti, yesaṃ natthi piyāppiyaṃ.

- 是故莫愛著，愛別離為苦，若無愛與憎，彼即無羈縛。
- *Therefore one should not treat anything as pleasant, for the loss of the pleasant is evil. There are no bonds for those for whom there is neither pleasant nor unpleasant.*

> - For the violation of the two morae rule in *piyāppiyaṃ*, see the note on 70.

---

#### 212

Piyato jāyatī soko, piyato jāyatī bhayaṃ,  
piyato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從喜愛生憂，從喜愛生怖，離喜愛無憂，何處有恐怖。
- *From what is pleasant comes grief, from what is pleasant comes fear. For one who is freed from what is pleasant there is no grief, much less fear.*

> - In pādas ab *jāyatī* is m.c., PDhp and Udāna-v read *jāyate*.

#### 213

Pemato jāyatī soko, pemato jāyatī bhayaṃ,  
pemato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從親愛生憂，從親愛生怖，離親愛無憂，何處有恐怖。
- *From love comes grief, from love comes fear. For one who is freed from love there is no grief, much less fear.*

#### 214

Ratiyā jāyatī soko, ratiyā jāyatī bhayaṃ,  
ratiyā vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從貪欲生憂，從貪欲生怖，離貪欲無憂，何處有恐怖。
- *From delight comes grief, from delight comes fear. For one who is freed from delight there is no grief, much less fear.*

#### 215

Kāmato jāyatī soko, kāmato jāyatī bhayaṃ,  
kāmato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從欲樂生憂，從欲樂生怖，離欲樂無憂，何處有恐怖。
- *From sensual pleasure comes grief, from sensual pleasure comes fear. For one who is freed from sensual pleasure there is no grief, much less fear.*

#### 216

Taṇhāya jāyatī soko, taṇhāya jāyatī bhayaṃ,  
taṇhāya vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從愛欲生憂，從愛欲生怖，離愛欲無憂，何處有恐怖。
- *From craving comes grief, from craving comes fear. For one who is freed from craving there is no grief, much less fear.*

---

#### 217

Sīladassanasampannaṃ, dhammaṭṭhaṃ saccavedinaṃ,  
attano kamma kubbānaṃ, taṃ jano kurute piyaṃ.

- 具戒及正見，住法知真諦，圓滿自所行，彼為世人愛。
- *One who has virtue and insight, is righteous, speaking the truth, doing his own tasks, him people hold dear.*

> - For the form of *kamma*, see the note on 15.

---

#### 218

Chandajāto anakkhāte, manasā ca phuṭo siyā,  
kāmesu ca appaṭibaddhacitto, “uddhaṃsoto” ti vuccati.

- 渴求離言法，充滿思慮心，諸欲心不著，是名上流人。
- *One should have a desire for the undefined, and be suffused with mind, and have one's thought not tied to sensual pleasures, (such a one) is called an up-streamer.*

---

#### 219

Cirappavāsiṃ purisaṃ, dūrato sotthim-āgataṃ,  
ñātimittā suhajjā ca, abhinandanti āgataṃ.

- 久客異鄉者，自遠處安歸，親友與知識，歡喜而迎彼。
- *A man who has been abroad for a long time, (and) has come back to safety from afar, him kinsmen, friends and companions welcome when he has come back.*

> - For the labialisation of *-a- &lt; -o-* after *-v-* in *sotthi* &lt; Skt *svasti*, see the note on 105.

#### 220

Tatheva katapuññam pi, asmā lokā paraṃ gataṃ,  
puññāni paṭigaṇhanti, piyaṃ ñātīva āgataṃ.

- 造福亦如是，從此生彼界，福業如親友，以迎愛者來。
- *In the same way his merits also receive one who has performed merits, gone from this world to the next world, as kinsmen receive a dear one who has come back.*