---
title: "法住品"
subtitle: "19:256-272"
language: "pi"
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 119
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Dhammaṭṭhavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 法住品
- *The Righteous*

---

#### 256

Na tena hoti dhammaṭṭho, yenatthaṃ sāhasā naye,  
yo ca atthaṃ anatthañca, ubho niccheyya paṇḍito,

- 鹵莽處事故，不為法住者，智者應辨別，孰正與孰邪，
- *One who would conduct a case hastily is not thereby righteous. But the learned one, who having determined both what is the case and what is not the case,*

> - I see no reason to follow the cty in believing that *sahasā =   sāhasena* with the meaning *musāvādena*, I take it to mean “hastily”. I similarly take *asāhasena* in 257 to mean “without hastiness”.
> - The cty supplies *vadati*, because pādas cd lack a finite verb. On the assumption that 256 and 257 are to be taken together, I take *nayatī* in 257b as the verb of the relative clause.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

#### 257

asāhasena dhammena, samena nayatī pare,  
dhammassa gutto medhāvī, “dhammaṭṭho” ti pavuccati.

- 導人不鹵莽，如法而公平，智者護於法，是名法住者。
- *conducts others without hastiness, with righteousness and impartiality, protected by the law and wise, is called righteous.*

> - It is difficult to believe that *nayati* is used of conductiong an *attha* in 256, but of leading people in 257. It is possible that *pare* refers to an unexpressed *atthe*, or is an abbreviated cpd = *paratthe* “other's cases”. For abbreviated cpds, see the note on 54. I translate the Pāli as it stands, giving “conduct” for *nayati* because that can be used of both a legal case and people.
> - Note the past participle *gutto* constructed with a gen in the sense of an instr.

---

#### 258

Na tena paṇḍito hoti, yāvatā bahu bhāsati,  
khemī averī abhayo, “paṇḍito” ti pavuccati.

- 不以多言故，彼即為智者，安靜無怨怖，是名為智者。
- *A man is not learned because he talks much. One who is secure, without hate, without fear is called learned.*

#### 259

Na tāvatā dhammadharo, yāvatā bahu bhāsati,  
yo ca appam pi sutvāna, dhammaṃ kāyena passati,  
sa ve dhammadharo hoti, yo dhammaṃ nappamajjati.

- 不以多言故，彼為持法者，彼雖聞少分，但由身見法，於法不放逸，是名持法者。
- *A man is not an expert in the doctrine simply because he talks much. But he who having heard even a little doctrine practises it with his body, he indeed is an expert in the doctrine who is not careless about the doctrine.*

> - Skt *pramad-* is constructed with the abl or loc. For abl in *-aṃ* (here *dhammaṃ*) see the note on 49.
> - PDhp *phassaye*, GDhp *phaṣa'i* and Udāna-v *spṛśet* suggest that in pāda d we should read *phassati* for *passati*. It would be better still to read an optative *phassaye*. For *p/ph* alternation, cf. *palitaṃ/phalitaṃ* 260.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

---

#### 260

Na tena thero so hoti, yenassa palitaṃ siro,  
paripakko vayo tassa, “moghajiṇṇo” ti vuccati.

- 不因彼白頭，即得為長老，彼年齡虛熟，徒有長老名。
- *He is not an elder simply because his head is grey. He has reached a ripe old age, he is called “old in vain”.*

> - Udāna-v reads *yāvatā palitaṃ śiraḥ*. For *p/ph* alternation see the note on 259.
> - For the use of *vayo* as a masculine noun in the phrase *paripakko vayo tassa*, literally “his age is ripe”, cf. the words used by the Buddha of himself at DN *paripakko vayo mayhaṃ*. Udāna-v reads *paripakvaṃ vayas   tasya*, at GDhp *parivako* is inconclusive, since *-o* may be a neuter ending in the Gāndhārī dialect.

#### 261

Yamhi saccañca dhammo ca, ahiṃsā saṃyamo damo,  
sa ve vantamalo dhīro, “thero” iti pavuccati.

- 於彼具真實，具法不殺生，節制並調伏，彼有智慧人，除滅諸垢穢，實名為長老。
- *In whom there is truth and righteousness, non-killing, self-restraint, taming, he indeed free from impurity and firm is called an elder.*

> - Dhp-a: *dhīro ti dhitisampanno*. This suggests the meaning “firm, steady” for *dhīra*, cf. 208.

---

#### 262

Na vākkaraṇamattena, vaṇṇapokkharatāya vā,  
sādhurūpo naro hoti, issukī maccharī saṭho.

- 嫉慳虛偽者，雖以其辯才，或由相端嚴，不為善良人。
- *Not by mere talk or beauty of complexion does a man who is envious, stingy and crafty become good.*

> - For *rūpa* at the end of cpd, see MW “sometimes used after an adjective or past participle to emphasise the meaning , or almost redundantly”, cf. *mūḷha-rūpa* 268.

#### 263

Yassa c’etaṃ samucchinnaṃ, mūlaghaccaṃ samūhataṃ,  
sa vantadoso medhāvī, “sādhurūpo” ti vuccati.

- 若斬斷此心，拔根及除滅，彼捨瞋智者，名為善良人。
- *He for whom this is cut out, removed root and all, destroyed, he, free from fault, wise, is called good.*

> - For *mūlaghaccaṃ* and *samūhata*, see the note on 250.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

---

#### 264

Na muṇḍakena samaṇo, abbato alikaṃ bhaṇaṃ,  
icchālobhasamāpanno, samaṇo kiṃ bhavissati?

- 若破戒妄語，削髮非沙門，充滿欲與貪，云何為沙門？
- *Not by tonsure does one who is without vows and who speaks untruth become an ascetic. How can one who is full of desire and greed become an ascetic?*

> - For the cty's interpretation of *vata*, see the note on 95.
> - In pāda b *alikaṃ* &lt; Skt *alīka* might be thought to be m.c., but note *alikavādinaṃ* 223, where there is no metrical reason for *-i-*. It is probable that *alīka* developed &gt; *alika* by analogy with the common *-ika* suffix.

#### 265

Yo ca sameti pāpāni, aṇuṃthūlāni sabbaso,  
samitattā hi pāpānaṃ, “samaṇo” ti pavuccati.

- 彼息滅諸惡，無論大與小，因息滅諸惡，故名為沙門。
- *But he who quietens evils, small or large, in every way, because of the quieting of evils is called an ascetic.*

> - Despite the historical inaccuracy, the cty's etymology of *samaṇo* (&lt; Skt *śramaṇa*) from *samitattā* (&lt; Skt *śam*) works in Pāli, as does *śamaṇa* from *śamaṇā* in PDhp. GDhp *śramaṇo* from *śamadhare* and Udāna-v *śramaṇo* from *śamitatvāt* are less successful. See the note on 142.
> - For *aṇuṃ-thūla*, see the note on 31.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

---

#### 266

Na tena bhikkhu so hoti, yāvatā bhikkhate pare,  
vissaṃ dhammaṃ samādāya, bhikkhu hoti na tāvatā.

- 僅向他行乞，不即是比丘，行宗教法儀，亦不為比丘。
- *One is not a bhikkhu simply because one begs others for alms, having adopted the domestic way of life, thereby one is not a bhikkhu.*

> - These two verses are together in SN, Mvu, GDhp and Udāna-v.

#### 267

Yodha puññañca pāpañca, bāhetvā brahmacariyavā,  
saṅkhāya loke carati, sa ve “bhikkhū” ti vuccati.

- 僅捨善與惡，修於梵行者，以知住此世，彼實名比丘。
- *But whoever has put aside merit and evil, a liver of the holy life, wanders the world carefully, he indeed is called a bhikkhu.*

> - Dhp-a: *yo'dhā ti yo idha sāsane*. I believe that *dha* here is an old error for *ca*. For the alternation *dha/ca/tu* = “but”, cf. 409 412 415-6. Udāna-v has *tu*, GDhp *du*, Mvu *ca*.
> - For the explanation of *brahmacariya* by the root *bāh-*, cf. *bāhitapāpo* 388.
> - For the explanation of *bhikkhu* by the root *bhid-*, see the note on 142.

---

#### 268

Na monena munī hoti, mūḷharūpo aviddasu,  
yo ca tulaṃ va paggayha, varam-ādāya paṇḍito,

- 愚昧無知者，不以默然故，而名為牟尼，智者如權衡，
- *Not by silence does a foolish, ignorant person become a sage. But whatever learned man, holding a balance, as it were, and taking the better choice,*

> - I follow the cty in assuming that these two verses are to be taken together, and I take *paṇḍito* in 268d as the subject of *parivajjeti* in 269a.
> - Skt *mauna* means “the state of being a *muni*”, and then the basic attribute of a *muni*, i.e. “silence”. If *muni* is to be derived from *man-/mnā-* (see the note on 269), then a *muni* is a thinker or knower, and the state of being a *muni* is thinking or knowing, so that *mona* could mean “thought” or “knowledge”. The cty is explaining that of the meanings “knowledge” and “silence” given for *mona*, the second is intended here.
> - For *rūpa* at the end of a cpd, see the note on 262.
> - For *ca = tu*, see the note on 5.

#### 269

pāpāni parivajjeti, sa munī tena so muni,  
yo munāti ubho loke, “muni” tena pavuccati.

- 捨惡取其善，乃得為牟尼，彼知於兩界，故稱為牟尼。
- *avoids evils, he is a sage. Thereby he is a sage. Whoever knows both in the world, he is called a sage for that reason.*

> - The cty is suggesting that the word *muni* is to be derived &lt; *munāti*. If this is correct, then *muni* originally meant “thinker”. The cty (probably because of the idea of measuring in *tula* in 268) explains *munāti* as meaning *mināti* “measures”.
> - In pāda c *yo munāti ubho loke* can be translated, and is so translated by some as “who knows both worlds”. I follow the cty in taking *loke* as a loc, and I assume that *ubho* refers *varaṃ* and *pāpāni*.

---

#### 270

Na tena ariyo hoti, yena pāṇāni hiṃsati,  
ahiṃsā sabbapāṇānaṃ, “ariyo” ti pavuccati.

- 彼人非聖賢，以其殺生故，不害諸眾生，是名為聖者。
- *One is not noble because one injures living creatures. Because of the non-injury of all living creatures one is called noble.*

> - For the truncated ending of *ahiṃsā = ahiṃsāya* (instr according to the cty, abl according to CPD), cf. *brahmacariyā* 388 and see Geiger §81.1 and Sn 110.
> - The cty tells a story about the Buddha telling a fisherman called Ariya that those who took the lives of living creatures could not be called *ariya*, but the form of pādas ab “he is not *ariya* because he kills” seems to imply more than this. They seem rather to be a rejection of an etymological explanation of *ariya*, perhaps based on *ari* = “enemy”, in the same way as the cty gives an explanation based on *ārā* “distant” for pādas cd.

---

#### 271

Na sīlabbatamattena, bāhusaccena vā pana,  
atha vā samādhilābhena, vivittasayanena vā,

- 不以戒律行，或由於多聞，或由證三昧，或由於獨居，
- *Not merely by virtuous conduct and vows nor, again, by much learning, nor by the attainment of meditation, nor by sleeping in seclusion,*

> - We may translate *sīlabbata* as “virtuous conduct and vows” or “vows of virtuous conduct”. I follow the cty in preferring the former.
> - GDhp, PDhp and Udāna-v all have forms based on *-śruta*, and the *-sacca* of the Pāli form is not easy to explain. The cty's explanation implies that the connection with *śruta* was understood. It is possible that the expected **bāhusucca &lt; bāhuśrutya* was influenced by *sacca* “truth”, but it has also been suggested that *bāhusacca* is &lt; **bāhusmartya &lt;   bahusmṛti*.
> - For *vā puna* in pāda b, cf. *vā pana* 42.
> - For *viviccasayana* as a syntactic cpd, see the note on 24.

#### 272

phusāmi nekkhammasukhaṃ, aputhujjanasevitaṃ,  
bhikkhu vissāsam-āpādi, appatto āsavakkhayaṃ.

- 謂受出家樂，非凡夫所能，汝等漏未盡，莫生保信想。
- *do I attain the happiness of the absence of desire, not attained by worldlings. Nor has a bhikkhu obtained confidence, as long as he has not attained the destruction of the āsavas.*

> - The cty is taking *māpādi* as a negative injunctive, which it explains by an optative (see the note on 133), and this explanation is followed by most translators. This interpretation can only be correct if *-ṃ* has been lost before *māpādi*, and Rau suggests reading *vissāsaṃ māpādi*. The loss of *-ṃ* cannot be m.c., therefore, it is not clear why Pāli does not have *-ṃ*. PDhp has *bhikkhū viśśāsam āpādi*, GDhp *bhikhu viśpasa mavadi*, Udāna-v *bhikṣur viśvāsam āpādyed*, Mvu *bhikṣu viśvāsam āpadye*. It is not clear why not one of these versions has *vissāsaṃ* (or the equivalent) with a negative, either *na* or *mā*. The fact that the metre does not preclude *-aṃ*, and yet no version reads it, lead us to the conclusion that the sentence is to be taken as positive and we should divide the words as *vissāsam āpādi*. The negative which the sense clearly requires is supplied by the particle *na* in the previous verse, which is to be taken with both the verb in pāda a and also with the verb in pāda c. The fact that the two verses occur together in Pāli, PDhp, GDhp, Udāna-v and Mvu, confirms that the transmission process in each of these traditions realised that the syntax of the two verses made them inseparable. I would therefore translate “Not by ... do I reach the happiness of release, (not by ...) has a bhikkhu attained confidence, not having gained ...”. The BHS versions, with an optative instead of *āpādi*, can be taken as supporting this suggestion. The Mvu redactor replaced *phusāmi* by the present participle *spṛhayaṃ*, giving the meaning “Not by ... would a bhikkhu, desiring the happiness of release, attain confidence.” The reversal of pādas ab and cd which we find in the Udāna-v suggests that the redactor understood it in this way, and by changing the order of the pādas made the sense very clear “Not by ... would a bhikkhu attain confidence, (or) would he reach the happiness ...”.