---
title: "象品"
subtitle: "23:320-333"
language: "pi"
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 123
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Nāgavagga{{</subtitle>}}

- 象品
- *The Elephant*

---

#### 320

Ahaṃ nāgo va saṅgāme, cāpato patitaṃ saraṃ,  
ativākyaṃ titikkhissaṃ, dussīlo hi bahujjano.

- 如象在戰陣，堪忍弓箭射，我忍謗亦爾，世多破戒者。
- *I shall endure abuse as a nāga elephant in battle endures arrows shot from the bow. Ill-natured indeed are the majority of people.*

> - PDhp *cāpātipatite śare*, GDhp *cavadhivadida śara*, Udāna-v *cāpād utpatitāṃ śarān*, I therefore translate *saraṃ* as a pl. For *-aṃ* as an acc pl ending, see the note on 64. As Brough says, it seems well nigh essential to assume that the original verse had a causative form *pātitaṃ*, and it is noteworthy that PDhp and Udāna-v agree with Dhp in having a non-causative form, GDhp is inconclusive.
> - PED states (s.v. *cāpa*) that *cāpāto* is m.c., there seems to be no reason why this should be so, since *cāpato* would not be unmetrical. The abl ending *-ā(t)o* is common in Pkt, but less so in Pāli, see Sn 198. The reading in PDhp suggests that *cāpāto patitaṃ* may be an old error for *cāpātipatitaṃ*. Cf. the explanation *cāpāto atikhīṇā* for *cāpātikhīṇā* in the note on 156.
> - I assume that *nāga* is a special sort of elephant, like *kuñjara* in 322, cf. 322 324 329-30.

#### 321

Dantaṃ nayanti samitiṃ, dantaṃ rājābhirūhati,  
danto seṭṭho manussesu, yotivākyaṃ titikkhati.

- 調禦象可赴集會，調禦象可為王乘，若能堪忍於謗言，人中最勝調禦者。
- *They lead a tamed one to war, the king mounts a tamed one. The tamed one, who endures abuse, is the best among men.*

> - It is strange that the cty does not give the meaning “war” for *samiti*. This might be thought to be the most likely meaning in the context, and I adopt it here.

#### 322

Varam-assatarā dantā, ājānīyā ca sindhavā,  
kuñjarā ca mahānāgā, attadanto tato varaṃ.

- 調禦之騾為優良，信度駿馬為優良，矯羅大象亦優良，自調禦者更優良。
- *Excellent are mules when tamed and Sindh thoroughbreds and great kuñjara nāga elephant, better than these is a tamed self.*

> - I take *kuñjara* as a parallel to *nāga*, and assume that it is a particular sort of elephant, perhaps, as PED implies, a “trumpeter”. Cf. *mātaṅga* 329-30. For *nāga*, see 320.
> - For *ājānīya (&lt; ājāneya)*, cf. *purisājañño* 193.
> - PDhp has *attā dānto tato varaṃ*, Udāna-v *ātma dāntas tato varam*, although the alternative version reads *ātmadāntas*, GDhp *atvadada* is inconclusive. “Tamed self” seems to be demanded by the sense (and is implied by *attanā sudantena* in 323), and we should perhaps read *attā danto* with PDhp.

---

#### 323

Na hi etehi yānehi, gaccheyya agataṃ disaṃ,  
yathāttanā sudantena, danto dantena gacchati.

- 實非彼等車乘，得達難到境地，若人善自調禦，由於調禦得達。
- *For not by these vehicles would a man go to the region where there is no rebirth, as by means of a well-tamed self. The tamed one goes by means of a tamed (vehicle).*

> - The cty is taking *agata* to mean “not gone to, not visited”. I take it to mean the place where there is no *gati*, i.e. it is not a place of rebirth (cf. 420), it is a place where no one is reborn.
> - For *disā* in the sense of “region, country”, see MW (s.v. *diś*) and cf. *bhūmim* in PDhp and Udāna-v.
> - Note the sandhi of *yathā + attanā &gt; yathāttanā* in pāda c in some editions. This is the result of a Sanskritising type of sandhi. For the violation of the two morae rule, see the note on 70.

---

#### 324

Dhanapālo nāma kuñjaro, kaṭukabhedano dunnivārayo,  
baddho kabaḷaṃ na bhuñjati, sumarati nāgavanassa kuñjaro.

- 如象名財護，泌液暴難制，繫縛不入食，惟念於象林。
- *The kuñjara elephant called Dhanapālaka is hard to control when he is oozing with rut. When tied up the kuñjara elephant does not eat a mouthful of food, (but) remembers the nāga elephant forest.*

> - For *nāga* see 320.

---

#### 325

Middhī yadā hoti mahagghaso ca, niddāyitā samparivattasāyī,  
mahāvarāho va nivāpapuṭṭho, punappunaṃ gabbham-upeti mando.

- 樂睡又貪食，轉側唯長眠，如豬食無厭，愚者數入胎。
- *When he is lazy and a glutton, a sleeper who rolls as he lies, like a great hog fed on grain, the fool comes to the womb again and again.*

> - For *middhī*, see Th 74.
> - For *mahagghasa*, see the note on 123.
> - We may agree with Rau that this verse about a *mahāvarāha* is not appropriate to the Nāgavagga. The compiler presumably thought that this vagga was the most suitable for the inclusion of a verse about a large animal. It is in the Yugavarga in Udāna-v, which has no Nāgavarga.

---

#### 326

Idaṃ pure cittam-acāri cārikaṃ, yenicchakaṃ yatthakāmaṃ yathāsukhaṃ,  
tad-ajjahaṃ niggahessāmi yoniso, hatthippabhinnaṃ viya aṅkusaggaho.

- 我此過去心，任意隨所欲，隨愛好遊行，我今悉調伏，如象師持鉤，制禦泌液象。
- *Formerly this mind wandered where it wished, where it liked, as it pleased. Today I shall control it properly, as a hook-holder controls an elephant in rut.*

> - For the alternation *ṃp/pp* (NC/CC) in *hatthi-ppabhinnaṃ (= hatthiṃ pabhinnaṃ)*, see the note on 31 and Th 77. Th 77 reads *niggahissāmi*, which is a v.l. in Ms L.
> - For the cognate acc *acāri cārikaṃ*, see the note on 108.
> - For *-d* as a historic form in a fossilised sandhi position in *tad = taṃ*, see the note on 72.

---

#### 327

Appamādaratā hotha, sacittam-anurakkhatha,  
duggā uddharathattānaṃ, paṅke sanno va kuñjaro.

- 當樂不放逸，善護於自心，自救出難處，如象出泥坑。
- *Be rejoicing in carefulness, protect your own mind, save yourselves from the difficult way like a kuñjara elephant sunk-in mud.*

---

#### 328

Sace labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃ caraṃ sādhuvihāridhīraṃ,  
abhibhuyya sabbāni parissayāni, careyya tenattamano satīmā.

- 若得同行伴，善行富智慮，能服諸艱困，欣然共彼行。
- *If one finds a zealous companion, a co-wanderer, a good-liver, wise, overcoming all dangers one should wander with him, happy (and) mindful.*

> - For the meaning “zealous” for *nipaka*, see Th 85.
> - I take *sādhuvihāridhīraṃ* to be a dvandva cpd, made up of *sādhuvihāri* and *dhīra*. This seems to be the way the cty is taking it.
> - PDhp reads *pariśrav[āni]*, Udāna-v *parisravāṇi*, cf. Aśokan *parisava* and BHS *pariśraya* and *parisrava*. It would seem that the original form of the word was *parisrava* (&lt; *sru* “flow”) and the idea of “flowing around” must be very similar to *āsava* “flowing in”. It is possible that *parissaya* is connected with Jain *parissaha*, where *-h-* is a glide consonant, replacing *y/v*. For the alternation *y/v*, see the note on 40.
> - For the eastern masculine acc pl ending *-āni* of *parissayāni*, see the note on 82.
> - In pāda d *satīmā* is m.c.

#### 329

No ce labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃ caraṃ sādhuvihāridhīraṃ,  
rājā va raṭṭhaṃ vijitaṃ pahāya, eko care mātaṅgaraññe va nāgo.

- 若無同行伴，善行富智慮，應如王棄國，如象獨行林。
- *If one does not find a zealous companion, a co-wanderer, a good-liver, wise, like a king leaving a conquered kingdom one should wander alone like a mātaṅga nāga elephant in the forest.*

> - In the cty's view, *mātaṅgo nāgo* means “large elephant” and in pāda d *mātaṅg'araññe* is for *mātaṅgo araññe*. Most translators ignore the cty's explanation, and either omit *mātaṅga*, or translate *mātaṅgaraññe* as “elephant forest”, i.e. the equivalent of *nāgavanassa* in 324.
> - I believe that the evidence for the interpretation of *mātaṅg'araññe* is not sufficient for us to be able to say decisively whether we are dealing with two separate words or a cpd, and much depends upon the value which we place upon the commentarial tradition. In the translation I take *nāgo* and *mātaṅga* as being in apposition, as I have taken *kuñjarā* and *nāgā* in apposition in 322, and I assume that *mātaṅga* is a particular sort of elephant, perhaps named after a geographical location.
> - The cty is therefore taking this of a victorious king who later decides to become a wanderer, cf. Sn 46. It seems, however, equally possible that it refers to a king who has been defeated and is obliged to flee from his kingdom when it has been conquered by another king.

#### 330

Ekassa caritaṃ seyyo, natthi bāle sahāyatā,  
eko care na ca pāpāni kayirā, appossukko mātaṅgaraññe va nāgo.

- 寧一人獨行，不與愚為友，獨行離欲惡，如象獨游林。
- *Wandering for a solitary person is better, there is no companionship with fools. One should wander alone and one should not do evil deeds, desirous of little, like a mātaṅga nāga elephant in the forest.*

> - It is not clear how the cty is interpreting *bāle* — perhaps as a loc “in a fool”. For the interpretation of *bāle* as an instr pl = Skt *bālais*, see the note on 61. PDhp reads *bāle bitiyatā*, Udāna-v has *bālaḥ sahāyakaḥ*, with *bālasahāyatā* in the alternative version.
> - In pāda d we should read *appossu[k]ko* m.c. The confusion between *-kk-* and *-k-* arises from the fact that the word may be a cpd of *appa* with *ussuka &lt; utsuka* or *appa* with *ossukka &lt; autsukya*.

---

#### 331

Atthamhi jātamhi sukhā sahāyā, tuṭṭhī sukhā yā itarītarena,  
puññaṃ sukhaṃ jīvitasaṅkhayamhi, sabbassa dukkhassa sukhaṃ pahānaṃ.

- 應時得友樂，適時滿足樂，命終善業樂，離一切苦樂。
- *Companions are pleasant when a need arises, contentment with this or that (i.e. with whatever turns up) is pleasant, merit is pleasant at the end of life, the abandonment of all pain is pleasant.*

> - I translate *sukha* in 331-3 as “pleasant”, “producing happiness” would be better, but is more cumbersome.
> - For *itarītara*, see Th 111. Note the internal sandhi of *-a + i- &gt; -ī-* in *itarītara*, contrast BHS *itaretara*.

#### 332

Sukhā matteyyatā loke, atho petteyyatā sukhā,  
sukhā sāmaññatā loke, atho brahmaññatā sukhā.

- 世中敬母樂，敬父親亦樂，世敬沙門樂，敬聖人亦樂。
- *Respect for one's mother is pleasant in the world, and respect for one's father is pleasant, respect for ascetics is pleasant in the world, and respect for brahmans is pleasant.*

> - We should note that *sāmañña* and *brahmañña* are abstract nouns in their own right “the state of being a *samaṇa*” and “the state of being a *brāhmaṇa*”. The addition of *-tā* (Udāna-v *śrāmaṇyatā* and *brāhmaṇyatā*) would make double abstract nouns. Such formations are not unknown in Pāli, e.g. *pāramitā*, where *pāramī* is an abstract noun from *parama*. It is, however, possible that this double formation implies a different meaning, and MW quotes *brahmaṇyatā* from MBh with the meaning “friendliness towards Brāhmans, piety”. Similarly we could take *sāmaññatā* as “friendliness towards samaṇas”. The origin of the forms *matteyyatā* and *petteyatā* (PDhp *mātreatā* and *petreatā*) is not clear. In Udāna-v *mātṛvyatā* and *pitṛvyatā* cannot be historically correct. The Pāli forms are perhaps to be derived &lt; **mātreya-tā* and **paitreya-tā*. They presumably represent similar double abstract formations from *mātṛ* and *pitṛ*. The idea of “proper attention to, respect for” is supported by the cty.

#### 333

Sukhaṃ yāva jarā sīlaṃ, sukhā saddhā patiṭṭhitā,  
sukho paññāya paṭilābho, pāpānaṃ akaraṇaṃ sukhaṃ.

- 至老持戒樂，正信成就樂，獲得智慧樂，不作諸惡樂。
- *Virtue lasting until old age is pleasant, established faith is pleasant, the obtaining of knowledge is pleasant, the non-doing of evil deeds is pleasant.*